[Amit Varma]: A few days ago, I dropped in to visit a rather rich friend of mine.
[Amit Varma]: He was at his desk, writing a cheque.
[Amit Varma]: Hey Mukesh bhai, I said, who are you writing a cheque to bro?
[Amit Varma]: Write for me also na, starving podcaster, that's a good cause.
[Amit Varma]: There's been a natural disaster somewhere, Mukesh bhai said.
[Amit Varma]: I am writing a cheque for the victims.
[Amit Varma]: Whenever there is any kind of natural disaster or even man-made disaster, I write a little
[Amit Varma]: contribution.
[Amit Varma]: See, it breaks my heart when people lose their homes or don't have access to food or medicines.
[Amit Varma]: That is very noble of you, Mukesh bhai, I said.
[Amit Varma]: But consider this, in India, for the last seven decades, millions of people have been
[Amit Varma]: homeless.
[Amit Varma]: Millions of people have starved to death and died from waterborne diseases because they
[Amit Varma]: didn't have access to clean drinking water.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't some natural or man-made disaster that put them there.
[Amit Varma]: They are living in the aftermath of a perennial disaster.
[Amit Varma]: Mukesh bhai looked at me with deep admiration.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, you are right, he said.
[Amit Varma]: Amit, you have opened my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: My compassion should not be selective but constant.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me one thing, what has caused this continuing disaster?
[Amit Varma]: I replied, Mukesh bhai, this is not caused by a hurricane or a typhoon, an earthquake
[Amit Varma]: or a tsunami, a gas leak or an industrial disaster.
[Amit Varma]: It is caused by government.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode is about the Bhopal Gas Tragedy of 1984 or rather the Bhopal Gas Tragedies
[Amit Varma]: of 1984.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today, Shruti Rajgopalan, contends that there wasn't one Bhopal Gas Tragedy but
[Amit Varma]: three of them.
[Amit Varma]: I spoke to her a few days ago on why she says that.
[Amit Varma]: So without much further ado, here we go.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi Amit, thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, people often talk about the Bhopal Gas Tragedy, but it is your case that there
[Amit Varma]: was not one Bhopal Gas Tragedy but three.
[Guest]: Tell me about all three of them.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think there are many tragedies that happened because of the initial gas leak
[Guest]: in Bhopal.
[Guest]: So just for those who can't remember the exact incident since it happened 33 years ago or
[Guest]: for those who were born after, there was an incredible man-made disaster that happened
[Guest]: in Bhopal in December 1984.
[Guest]: It happened at midnight on 2nd, 3rd December.
[Guest]: There was a plant set up in Bhopal in one of the most crowded areas.
[Guest]: It was an industrial plant that used to produce chemical fertilizers.
[Guest]: It was set up jointly as a partnership between Union Carbide Corporation and the Government
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: And to make that the output of the fertilizer, one of the inputs required was an extremely
[Guest]: dangerous gas called methyl isocyanide.
[Guest]: Now for various reasons that is not pertinent to go into at the moment, such as the regulatory
[Guest]: system was lax, it wasn't properly enforced, the company management was extremely corrupt
[Guest]: and didn't really bother to follow all the safety instructions.
[Guest]: And there was also a fair amount of laxity because they didn't follow first world standards
[Guest]: in a third world country, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: There was a mishap and this mishap translated into the leaking of the extremely like fatally
[Guest]: deadly gas called methyl isocyanide into the atmosphere in one of the most crowded areas
[Guest]: in Bhopal in the middle of the night.
[Guest]: Now the consequence of that was about somewhere between 2000 to 3000 people died almost instantaneously.
[Guest]: And it is said that at that time on that day, about an additional 50,000 to 60,000 individuals
[Guest]: were affected by the gas.
[Guest]: And over a period of time, they estimated that at least 200,000 people are suffering
[Guest]: from injuries of various degrees from mild to extremely severe, all linked to the leak
[Guest]: of the methyl isocyanide gas.
[Guest]: So when people say Bhopal gas tragedy, they usually mean the gas leak that happened on
[Amit Varma]: the night of December 2nd.
[Amit Varma]: And this is essentially tragedy one.
[Amit Varma]: Now, as soon as this happened, a curious class of people descended upon India, we call them
[Amit Varma]: ambulance chasers.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So as you know, Union Carbide is an American corporation.
[Guest]: The plant in India was called UCIL, Union Carbide India Limited.
[Guest]: So it was set up in partnership with Government of India.
[Guest]: And its management was, you know, part Indian, part foreign.
[Guest]: It was an American company that had not followed the rules and led to a terrible industrial
[Guest]: accident in India.
[Guest]: So everyone realized that this kind of accident is going to end up in courts, and there is
[Guest]: going to be a huge liability payout, right, or a settlement to all the victims.
[Guest]: So while the government tried to have some kind of an exercise to round up health services,
[Guest]: immediate relief for the victims, collecting all the bodies of those who were dead, trying
[Guest]: to match families, you know, kids with their parents and so on.
[Guest]: And if for those who are curious, Raghu Rai, the photographer, has a beautiful photo essay
[Guest]: on the Bhopal gas tragedy in its immediate aftermath.
[Guest]: It's a little bit startling to see those pictures, but all this is very well documented.
[Guest]: So aside from the government relief workers and the journalists and the bureaucrats, there
[Guest]: was a curious class that descended into Bhopal and it was the ambulance chasers in America.
[Guest]: So it was all these American fast speaking lawyers who showed up in their suits and who
[Guest]: took out all these contracts based on contingency fees.
[Guest]: Contingency fees is a style of fees where the lawyer gets paid only if the victim actually
[Guest]: gets a settlement.
[Guest]: And usually that proportion of the lawyers free from the settlement is between, say,
[Guest]: 30% and 50%.
[Guest]: That's the usual contingency fee arrangement where you can have many.
[Guest]: So let's say I was affected and I got, let's say I broke a leg and I got $10,000 as settlement.
[Guest]: They would say that, you know, why don't you recover since you have a broken leg?
[Guest]: We will sue the car that crashed into you and therefore broke your leg and we will recover
[Guest]: the money.
[Guest]: We will keep 30%, you know, $3,333 and you get the rest of the amount.
[Guest]: And that's how the split is.
[Guest]: So hundreds of these lawyers showed up in Bhopal, they went to all these local victims
[Guest]: who were really traumatized, who barely spoke any English, who were in no emotional or intellectual
[Guest]: space to make this kind of a decision.
[Guest]: These American lawyers promised all sorts of things.
[Guest]: They got signatures on all sorts of contracts to represent these victims and they went back
[Guest]: to America and close to 10,000 different claims were filed, even before the first set of relief
[Guest]: was provided to the Bhopal victims.
[Amit Varma]: That sounds pretty rapacious and insensitive, you know, almost like the reporters these
[Amit Varma]: days who come at the scene of a tragedy and thrust a mic in the face of the victim and
[Guest]: say, okay, how are you feeling now?
[Guest]: So ambulance chasers are sort of like considered the bottom feeders of the American legal system.
[Guest]: It's very pejorative word to call an American lawyer an ambulance chaser or to call any
[Guest]: lawyer an ambulance chaser.
[Guest]: And they did this.
[Guest]: I mean, the feeling at the time was that Americans caused a tragedy because of the industrial,
[Guest]: you know, framework and the laxity in foreign safety measures, and now American lawyers
[Guest]: are going to exploit this tragedy and further make money off of the misery of these poor
[Guest]: Indian victims in Bhopal.
[Guest]: Most of them living in a very, very, you know, relatively low income, extremely crowded area
[Guest]: of Bhopal, which was right next to the industrial plant.
[Guest]: And that didn't sit well with anyone.
[Guest]: Like it wasn't, you know, local versus global.
[Guest]: It wasn't rural versus urban.
[Guest]: It wasn't any like typical polarization, left versus right split.
[Guest]: It's like nobody found this unsavory mess palatable.
[Guest]: Everyone wanted these ambulance chasers gone.
[Guest]: Different people had different solutions.
[Guest]: Now curiously enough, since all these claims had been filed in the United States in a New
[Guest]: York court before Judge Keenan, all the claims were amalgamated.
[Guest]: And he was a judge who gave the decision on where this case would be heard, because it
[Guest]: was very clear by then that there is going to be a huge lawsuit.
[Guest]: So what was felt was we need to have the case in one particular place.
[Guest]: Curiously enough, the government of India was extremely well-intentioned and it actually
[Guest]: argued that the Indian legal and judicial system doesn't have the capacity to handle
[Guest]: this case and this large number of claims and that the case should be fought in the
[Guest]: United States.
[Guest]: And ironically, the union carbide had representatives and people representing the Indian legal system
[Guest]: who verified that the Indian legal system is excellent and is actually capable of handling
[Guest]: these claims.
[Guest]: So Union Carbide wanted the case moved to India.
[Guest]: The government of India wanted the case to be heard in the United States.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty bizarre.
[Guest]: Why for both?
[Guest]: Simply because Union Carbide figured out that the American tort liability system is such
[Guest]: that they would probably go bankrupt paying out legal fees and settlement fees for the
[Guest]: tragedy.
[Guest]: And they felt that the Indian system wouldn't punish them in a similar way.
[Guest]: The Indian system didn't have a proper tort liability jurisprudence that had developed.
[Guest]: And there had never been a class action lawsuit in India, you know, tort or otherwise.
[Guest]: So class action lawsuits were the vogue in the United States, thanks to the asbestos
[Guest]: and lead poisoning cases.
[Guest]: If you've seen movies like Erin Brockovich, you know what I'm talking about.
[Guest]: And such a thing hadn't yet happened in India and you know, we didn't have good precedent
[Guest]: for it.
[Guest]: So Union Carbide knew that they would have to pay out large amounts because of liability
[Amit Varma]: in this case, but they thought the amount would be lower in India and so did the Indian
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: And the Indian government did its very best to represent Indian interests and really genuinely
[Guest]: wanted the victims to be heard and wanted them to be heard in an American court to get
[Guest]: justice from an American company.
[Amit Varma]: Now the interesting question that comes up here is that the ambulance chasers therefore
[Amit Varma]: would have made sure that not only were there a whole bunch of cases, even if they were
[Amit Varma]: reported, but that the victims would then get just 66% of the compensation, which surely
[Amit Varma]: many must have felt was unfair.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why should they not get 100%?
[Amit Varma]: So what did the Indian government do to tackle this problem of ambulance chasers?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So as I mentioned, across the board, across all sorts of, you know, different perspectives,
[Guest]: everyone felt that ambulance chasers are just, they need to be driven out and that the victims
[Guest]: are genuinely suffering.
[Guest]: And secondly, that American ambulance chasers can't possibly represent the interests of
[Guest]: Indian victims from so far away.
[Guest]: And we don't know if they'll actually end up paying them out and so on.
[Guest]: So they had to figure out some way.
[Guest]: So what the government did was it legislated, it did what it does best.
[Guest]: So at this time, we're already talking about the Rajiv Gandhi government.
[Guest]: It first passed an ordinance, which later turned into an act.
[Guest]: It's called the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster Act.
[Guest]: And what the act essentially did was it said that no one except the government of India
[Guest]: can represent the Bhopal gas victims in a court of law.
[Guest]: So it got the exclusive right to represent the victims.
[Guest]: Now that exclusive right essentially means that you're not going to have any ambulance
[Guest]: chasers.
[Guest]: And at the same time, the Bhopal gas victims are going to get the best legal help.
[Guest]: Because think about it, the Attorney General of India and his team is going to fight the
[Amit Varma]: case for the victims.
[Guest]: So they'll get 100% of the compensation.
[Guest]: And this 100% won't come from like some ordinary lawyer who doesn't know what he's doing.
[Guest]: It's going to come from the Attorney General of India and his team.
[Guest]: So it's a highly sophisticated set of legal minds who are fighting this case.
[Guest]: And they thought this is the best way of protecting the victims.
[Guest]: And meanwhile, the government gave interim relief.
[Guest]: So we did everything right in some sense, right.
[Guest]: So it gave relief and the judge ordered that the government and Union Carbide has to pay
[Guest]: some money immediately while the case is being fought.
[Guest]: It also set up all these health centers.
[Guest]: And everyone thought this is the best way to tackle this problem of ambulance chasers
[Guest]: who are trying to make money out of the misery of an Indian tragedy caused by American companies.
[Amit Varma]: So the scene effect of this legislation is number one, you get the greedy, rapacious
[Amit Varma]: ambulance chasers out of the way, who don't have enough local knowledge anyway, and may
[Amit Varma]: not be able to properly represent them.
[Amit Varma]: Number two, you make sure that the victims get 100% of the compensation.
[Amit Varma]: Number three, you make sure the victims are represented by the Attorney General of India,
[Amit Varma]: which who has all the legal services and the local knowledge at his disposal.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems that wow, what a great legislation.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out, this legislation actually led to Bhopal gas tragedy number two and three.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Tell me about them.
[Guest]: So Bhopal gas tragedy number two and three are both linked and separate.
[Guest]: So Bhopal gas tragedy number two, essentially what happened was once the government of India
[Guest]: passed the Bhopal gas leak act, which gave it the exclusive right to represent, they
[Guest]: started figuring out how they will represent the people of India.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, Judge Keenan in New York, after hearing all the arguments, decided that the
[Guest]: best place for the case to be fought is in India.
[Guest]: So the case bounced back to the district courts in Bhopal and then moved its way up to the
[Guest]: Supreme Court.
[Guest]: While all this was going on, the powers that be, both in the judiciary and in the government,
[Guest]: in the executive, felt that this case will go on forever and ever, and they need to enter
[Guest]: a speedy settlement so that Union Carbide can just release the money and government
[Guest]: of India can get the money.
[Guest]: So what happened to the second tragedy was because all this was done so hastily by a
[Guest]: government which wanted to put a band-aid on this problem and didn't care too much about
[Guest]: the constitutional rights of people, their right to represent themselves, their right
[Guest]: to be heard after a tragedy, their right to a proper legal process that is followed to
[Guest]: give them their due, it entered into a very hasty settlement.
[Guest]: The settlement was for $470 million, which in those days in 1989 came to about 750 crore
[Guest]: rupees, which was a large sum of money.
[Guest]: This settlement was hastily entered based on the following numbers.
[Guest]: So they thought there would be 3,000 deaths and 52,000 victims total, right, aside from
[Guest]: deaths.
[Guest]: And these 55,000 victims, we will split the pot of 750 crores, you know, the victims who
[Guest]: died get a larger sum of money and the other 52,000 victims, based on the severity of their
[Guest]: injury, you pay them a certain amount.
[Guest]: Part of this legal tragedy or this government created mess was they absorbed through the
[Guest]: settlement, they absorbed Union Carbide Corporation of all past, present and future liability.
[Guest]: This is really peculiar in a case like this, this shouldn't happen.
[Guest]: There were a lot of fingers pointed and raised at, you know, corruption and scam by the Rajiv
[Guest]: Gandhi government and then Attorney General saying that this is really peculiar.
[Guest]: We still don't even know what are the terrible effects of methyl isocyanide.
[Guest]: It's already entered the groundwater system in Bhopal.
[Guest]: Unborn children after the case, women who were pregnant at the time and the kids were
[Guest]: not yet born, they were born with deformities.
[Guest]: Women who became pregnant after drinking the groundwater, say five to 10 years later, still
[Guest]: had children who were born with deformities because there was methyl isocyanide in that
[Guest]: water.
[Guest]: So given that it was such a deadly gas, and we weren't entirely sure what are the health
[Guest]: effects and other effects of this gas, it was ludicrous at the time to absolve a company
[Guest]: of future liability, right?
[Guest]: So this was another big part of the tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: A tangential question though, if the government itself isn't the victim, I mean, the individuals
[Amit Varma]: are the victim, let's say I'm a victim of that for whatever reason, and I get lung cancer
[Amit Varma]: because of whatever the gas is, how can the government absolve the company of his liability
[Guest]: towards me?
[Guest]: Exactly the point.
[Guest]: So there was a case called Chamanlal Sahu versus Union of India, which challenged this
[Guest]: particular legislation on various grounds, including the fundamental rights of these
[Guest]: individuals, which included a right to a proper legal procedure.
[Amit Varma]: Because otherwise, you're taking away the autonomy of all the individuals concerned
[Amit Varma]: with the government just says that on their behalf, I absolve you.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So this was a very big constitutional tragedy, right?
[Guest]: The fact that the government could take away such an important right.
[Guest]: Now I'm not minimizing the fact that the gas leak happened, and it was a terrible industrial
[Guest]: disaster caused by a firm which was frankly just interested in profit and nothing else,
[Guest]: not even long term profit, it was extremely corrupt.
[Guest]: I don't deny any of that.
[Guest]: But now, let's say an industrial disaster has happened, and you set the clock from that
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: The government contributed as much to the misery of the people as Union Carbide did
[Guest]: by taking away their rights.
[Guest]: There's a second problem with Chamanlal Sahu, the case actually addressed.
[Guest]: Remember that there was a huge conflict of interest because the government of India was
[Guest]: half the owner of Union Carbide India Limited.
[Guest]: No foreign company could set up a 100% investment plant in India in those socialist times.
[Guest]: They absolved themselves and that was many people said that that was one of the ostensible
[Guest]: reasons was to protect the people, but they were so keen to pass this legislation and
[Guest]: get the exclusive right so that the government is absolved of all problems.
[Guest]: So there was a terrible conflict of interest through this act.
[Guest]: Because remember, the government was also at fault.
[Guest]: One the government partially owned the company.
[Guest]: Second, the government regulators did not enforce all the industrial regulation.
[Guest]: So yes, Union Carbide was lax on its safety standards.
[Guest]: But what were all the government industrial inspectors doing, who were supposed to go
[Guest]: and inspect every factory, especially those factories, which actually have extremely fatal
[Guest]: poisonous gases in a contained space, right in a highly urban area.
[Guest]: So the government was at fault.
[Guest]: It wasn't completely blameless, but because of this conflict of interest, this case happened.
[Guest]: And then I think by then everyone was sort of exhausted and no one wanted to create a
[Guest]: new legal problem.
[Guest]: Because if you take the government's exclusive right away, you reset the clock, the ambulance
[Guest]: chasers come back, like there was just too much uncertainty.
[Guest]: So I think at some level, not because of good jurisprudence, but just because of expediency,
[Guest]: the courts decided to favor the government, it held that the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster
[Amit Varma]: Act was constitutional.
[Guest]: So Chamanlal Sahu lost.
[Guest]: Chamanlal Sahu, that case was not in his favor.
[Guest]: And the law held, and it continued to have the exclusive right to represent and therefore
[Amit Varma]: the settlement also held.
[Amit Varma]: So this is tragedy too, that the government settled in 89 for a much lower sum of money
[Amit Varma]: than it should have, and that it absorbed Union Carbide India, of which it was half
[Unknown]: owner.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So this is tragedy too.
[Guest]: What is tragedy three?
[Guest]: Tragedy three is a little less obvious.
[Guest]: So remember, we were talking about all these terrible ambulance chasers who showed up in
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: The Bhopal Gas Leak Act, many feel at that time, rightly legislated against these ambulance
[Guest]: chasers by giving the government the exclusive right to represent.
[Guest]: Now, let's not go into tragedy too.
[Guest]: That also happened because of the exclusive right to represent.
[Guest]: Let's focus on the fact that now only the government can represent these people and
[Guest]: the ambulance chasers can't.
[Guest]: Now on the face of it, these people, you know, the settlement has already been made.
[Guest]: 750 crores has already been collected.
[Guest]: Remember, without ambulance chasers, the government's not going to take the cut.
[Guest]: So it's going to give 100% of the money to the victims and everything should be fine.
[Guest]: And yet, every time I'm in Jantar Mantar, Bhopal gas victims are still either protesting
[Guest]: through a hunger fast or something else, and they still haven't received their claim.
[Guest]: Every time an American president lands in India, Bhopal Gas Leak victims are extremely
[Guest]: upset that the CEO of Union Carbide wasn't criminally prosecuted and wasn't extradited.
[Guest]: So this is still a persisting problem.
[Guest]: After 33 years of the event, and after 27 years of the settlement, we still don't have
[Guest]: any way of reaching the money to the victims.
[Guest]: Now why?
[Guest]: You might ask.
[Guest]: The reason is that ambulance chasers take a third of the cut or half the cut of the
[Guest]: settlement, but they only get paid that money if the victim actually gets the settlement.
[Guest]: So if the victim is not getting the settlement, they don't get paid the money.
[Guest]: So you know where I'm going with this.
[Guest]: This is a highly incentive compatible system.
[Guest]: The incentives of the ambulance chasers are perfectly aligned with the incentives of the
[Guest]: victim.
[Guest]: Now what about the incentives of the bureaucrats and the attorney general and the judges and
[Guest]: all those wonderful, well-meaning, well-intentioned people that the Bhopal Gas Leak Act actually
[Guest]: enabled to represent the victims?
[Guest]: They have no incentive to figure out the correct number of victims, the severity of their problem,
[Guest]: and how much compensation they should be given, because they get paid their salary irrespective
[Guest]: of whether these victims get paid their compensation or not.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And just to be clear, the ambulance chasers therefore plays a filtering process in this.
[Amit Varma]: He can filter out the false patients from the real patients and do the entire filtering
[Amit Varma]: work because it is in his interest to do so.
[Amit Varma]: He only gets paid when the victims get paid.
[Amit Varma]: So he doesn't want to waste time on false cases.
[Guest]: So this, I'm glad you raised this point.
[Guest]: So one of the part of the third tragedy is that the victims have still not gotten paid.
[Guest]: Now one of the reasons the victims haven't gotten paid is that the government says it
[Guest]: can't tell which cases are real and which cases are spurious.
[Guest]: Now remember the figure that there were supposed to be 3,000 deaths and 52,000 other cases
[Guest]: of various severity, within about two years of the settlement, the government of India
[Guest]: admitted that the number is maybe closer to 5,000 deaths and closer to 100,000 cases,
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: As of say 2004 or 2005, over 1 lakh claims have been filed.
[Guest]: So yes, time has passed, so more fatalities may have happened which were actually linked
[Guest]: to the Bhopal gas leak.
[Guest]: So even allowing for all of those things, this is a ridiculously large number compared
[Guest]: to what the government originally estimated.
[Guest]: So now two things are going on.
[Guest]: One, either the government misestimated and all these claims are genuine or the government
[Guest]: misestimated and some of these claims are still fake or spurious claims, right?
[Guest]: Now how can we tell the genuine claims from the spurious claims?
[Guest]: How do we make sure that the genuine victims get paid and the spurious victims don't get
[Guest]: paid?
[Guest]: So government did what it always does.
[Guest]: It demanded everything in triplicate.
[Guest]: It demanded that you go to a health official and then a second health official and it can
[Guest]: only be this kind of a hospital in that neighborhood that you're from and then this particular
[Guest]: guy needs to sign off on it and only then you will get your compensation award, right?
[Guest]: Now imagine if you are a victim of a gas leak and you have all these health problems and
[Guest]: your family members have died.
[Amit Varma]: What is your ability to go through this process?
[Guest]: I mean, it just adds suffering to suffering.
[Guest]: It adds suffering to suffering and also you don't have the agency to go through this kind
[Guest]: of a very severe legal vetting process to actually get your claim.
[Amit Varma]: And imagine 28 years of this.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Now you have 28 years of this, of going.
[Guest]: So at last count, there are 6,000 gas victims a day that go to Bhopal hospitals to get treated.
[Guest]: 6,000 a day.
[Guest]: So clearly the health problems are persisting and the money needs to be given and they're
[Guest]: in and out of hospitals.
[Guest]: So how are they going to navigate this complex procedure?
[Guest]: Second, there is obviously a lot of corruption in this, right?
[Guest]: A lot of people withhold their signature and say, if you give me money, they're saying
[Guest]: this to gas victims, so they're going to go straight to hell.
[Guest]: But they tell the gas leak victims that if you're going to give me money, only then I
[Guest]: will sign off on the 50 forms that you need signatures on.
[Guest]: So on.
[Guest]: That's one part of the problem.
[Guest]: Simultaneously, there are fake claims of people who are hale and hearty, who happen to know
[Guest]: what's going on, who happen to know the compounder in a hospital or the doctor in another government
[Guest]: hospital who managed to get all these signatures and process that claim.
[Guest]: So because this was such a huge problem, about 10 years ago, the government just stopped
[Guest]: processing claims because it said we can't tell the genuine from the spurious claims.
[Guest]: The 750 crores that came in the settlement sat in an account in the RBI.
[Guest]: It has collected interest and 1,500 crores is yet to be dispersed.
[Guest]: We still haven't paid 1,500 crores to these victims.
[Guest]: So there's money, there are victims, there is a mechanism, none of it works.
[Guest]: Now think about this.
[Guest]: There are, there's a problem of type one and type two errors as we call it.
[Guest]: So type one errors are false positives, type two errors are false negatives.
[Guest]: A false positive in this context would be a fake claim.
[Guest]: That is someone who is not genuinely a victim of a gas leak falls a claim, his claim should
[Guest]: not be paid.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: A false negative is someone who is a genuine victim of a gas leak and should be paid.
[Guest]: So you want to separate these two cases.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess you want to make sure no false negatives happen.
[Amit Varma]: If some false positives happen, that's okay.
[Guest]: It's leakage.
[Guest]: It's really interesting that you say that because a lot of criminal law is based on
[Guest]: that principle.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: We will let a thousand guilty men go free, but not hang one innocent person.
[Guest]: Which is exactly most criminal law has really tight procedural rules to avoid the problem
[Guest]: of false positives, even if there are a lot of false negatives.
[Guest]: So that's the trade-off made in the most extreme cases like death penalty in criminal law.
[Guest]: In this case, there is a trade-off, you're right, and one would like to avoid both kinds
[Guest]: of problems.
[Guest]: One would want to avoid cases where genuine victims don't get paid and spurious victims
[Guest]: do get paid.
[Guest]: But having said that, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I mean, if there is a trade-off or a problem, it is better that both genuine and spurious
[Guest]: victims get paid as opposed to nobody getting paid.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Certainly.
[Guest]: I agree with you on that.
[Guest]: Now, having said that, the ambulance chasers solve both type one and type two error problems
[Guest]: or rather minimize type one and type two error problems, and every system has to be about
[Guest]: error minimization.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now, how do they do that?
[Guest]: Remember what I talked about when I was discussing contingency fees?
[Guest]: It seems terrible that someone who's a victim of an industrial disaster while they are suffering
[Guest]: must part with a third of their compensation that is actually given to them to make them
[Guest]: whole because of their suffering.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So it seems like a very unsavory and terrible thing.
[Guest]: This class of people seem to be making money out of someone else's misery.
[Guest]: Having said that, the flip side to it is none of these victims would get paid in the first
[Guest]: place if they didn't have anyone to represent their interests.
[Guest]: And who better to represent their interests than someone who actually gets a third of
[Amit Varma]: their interests?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now, why would ambulance chasers solve the false positive problem?
[Guest]: A lot of these claims would actually have to go through a judicial system.
[Guest]: False positive claims won't hold up in court.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because the opposition, which in this case would be Union Carbide, would poke holes.
[Guest]: Union Carbide is interested in paying as little liability as possible, right?
[Guest]: So it's in their interest to go through all the paperwork and the vetting procedure themselves
[Guest]: to make sure that they don't have to pay every additional claim.
[Guest]: Now Union Carbide is not interested whether it's a genuine or a spurious claim.
[Guest]: They're just going to try and poke holes through all claims.
[Guest]: But resources are scarce and ambulance chasers will only pick the cases that they have the
[Guest]: highest likelihood of winning.
[Guest]: So they will themselves minimize the number of spurious claims because they'll have to
[Guest]: spend their own energy on it and they'll get paid no money for it.
[Guest]: And they will get paid money for the genuine claims because they would be harder to poke
[Guest]: holes through by the opposition.
[Guest]: And therefore the genuine claims and the spurious claims would be filtered by this private adjudicating
[Guest]: process without even before a judge or a government official gets involved simply because that's
[Guest]: the incentive compatible system.
[Guest]: So that's a question of spurious claims.
[Guest]: Now what about genuine claims?
[Guest]: Ambulance chasers are going to go forward with the most genuine claims first because
[Guest]: those will make the best case and come out with the highest payment, right?
[Guest]: And then move down the order.
[Guest]: So there seems to be some natural and intelligently incentive compatible selection of the kind
[Guest]: of cases that actually get heard because ambulance chasers end up paying all the costs upfront
[Guest]: and only get paid if the victims get paid.
[Guest]: So ambulance chasers and a competitive adjudication system, you know, where you have a common
[Guest]: law system that is you have a for and an against as opposed to civil law systems where a judge
[Guest]: goes on an inquisition and figures out the merits of a system.
[Guest]: These two things combined actually have the ability to minimize type one and type two
[Guest]: errors.
[Guest]: And while we have a common law adjudicating system where you have opposing sides who will
[Guest]: go through every claim, we subverted that when the government of India got the exclusive
[Guest]: right to represent.
[Guest]: And the second aspect that we completely eliminated was the ambulance chasers who actually managed
[Guest]: to do the right thing without meaning to do the right thing, but end up doing the right
[Guest]: thing simply in the interest of getting a third of the contingency fees.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a precise thing.
[Amit Varma]: You might have found ambulance chasers greedy and obnoxious and insensitive, but the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line is that just by the virtue of the incentives at play, they were performing a very useful
[Amit Varma]: function, which the government eliminated and we could not perform themselves.
[Amit Varma]: To sum up, therefore, these are the three Bhopal gas tragedies.
[Amit Varma]: Bhopal gas tragedy one is of course, the events of December 1984, where the gas leak thousands
[Amit Varma]: of people died.
[Amit Varma]: Hundreds of thousands of people perhaps were affected and this continued for decades, a
[Amit Varma]: terrible tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: Tragedy number two is the first unseen effect of the act of the government pass that is
[Amit Varma]: barring the ambulance chasers and taking the onus upon themselves to represent all the
[Amit Varma]: victims was when they accepted a smaller settlement than they should have.
[Amit Varma]: And be more shockingly, they absolved Union Carbide India of all liabilities, thereby,
[Amit Varma]: you know, unilaterally taking away the autonomy and decision making of all the individuals
[Amit Varma]: who were affected by that, which just seems to me to be morally perverse, it's just completely
[Amit Varma]: flat out wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And the third great tragedy is that for 28 years, and you spoke about how protests happen
[Amit Varma]: when every US president comes to India, Bhopal gas victims will protest, we'll consider that
[Amit Varma]: the settlements happened in 1989.
[Amit Varma]: And these protests have probably been happening from the time of George Bush senior, through
[Amit Varma]: Bill Clinton, through George Bush Jr.
[Guest]: It happened when Obama came.
[Amit Varma]: It happened when Obama came.
[Amit Varma]: And if Mr. Trump comes, I'm sure it will happen again.
[Amit Varma]: And it's 28 years of to use Larkin's phrase, misery spiling on deepening like a coastal
[Amit Varma]: shelf.
[Amit Varma]: It's a terrible, terrible tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, thanks so much for being on the show today.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out our archival episodes at seen unseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Shruti on Twitter at S Rajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Goodbye for now.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, check out another hit show from Indus
[Amit Varma]: Fox Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus Brocha.
[Unknown]: You can download it on any podcasting network.